# MaveDB

MaveDB is a public repository for datasets from Multiplexed Assays of Variant Effect (MAVEs), such as those generated by deep mutational scanning (DMS) or massively parallel reporter assay (MPRA) experiments. Despite the importance of MAVE data for basic and clinical research, there is no standard resource for their discovery and distribution. Here, we present MaveDB (https://www.mavedb.org), a public repository for large-scale measurements of sequence variant impact, designed for interoperability with applications to interpret these datasets.

MaveDB is open-source, released under the AGPLv3 license.

MaveDB is hosted by the Fowler Lab in the Department of Genome Sciences at the University of Washington. It is supported and developed by the University of Washington, the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, and the Brotman Baty Institute.

## Data Organization

MaveDB has three dataset types: Score Set, Experiment, and Experiment Set. All score, count, and target information is stored in score sets. Experiment sets and experiments are used for organization and metadata.

The dataset types are organized hierarchically. Each experiment set can contain multiple experiments and each experiment can contain multiple score sets.

## Score Sets

To capture the structure of real-world study designs, MaveDB is organized hierarchically into score sets, experiments, and experiment sets. Score sets, the most basic unit of organization, contain the variant effect scores and additional metadata such as target sequence information and detailed methods. Each variant effect score is a numeric value. 

## Accession Number Formats

MaveDB accession numbers use the URN (Uniform Resource Name) format. These accession numbers have a hierarchical structure that reflects the relationship between experiment sets, experiments, score sets, and individual variants in MaveDB.

## Studies

MaveDB's variant effect scores are captured from two separate studies, involving specific genes and accession numbers. The following provides information to which genes are included in each study, and methodology behind calculating the scores. 

### Calmodulin yeast complementation
* Includes genes: CALM1, SUMO1, UBE2I, and TPK1
* Method: A Deep Mutational Scan of Calmodulin (CALM1) using functional complementation in yeast was performed using DMS-TileSeq and a machine-learning method was used to impute the effects of missing variants and refine measurements of lower confidence.

### VAMP-seq
* Includes genes: PTEN and TPMT
* Method: Barcoded variant libraries were created using inverse PCR. Barcodes were associated with full-length variants using Pacific Biosciences SMRT sequencing to generate long reads. Each protein variant is fused to EGFP so that its abundance can be tracked using fluorescence. Cells were sorted into bins using FACS based on the ratio of EGFP to mCherry.

## MaveVis

 MaveVis is a webtool for visualizing [Variant Effect Maps](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-018-1916-x) from MaveDB as heatmaps together with conservation and protein structure information.

 ### How to Intrepret the Output

* The heatmap at center of the visualization plots the protein's amino acid positions along the x-axis against all possible amino acid changes. Each cell is colored on a scale from blue via white to red, where blue represents a null-like score (i.e. complete loss-of-function), white represents a wildtype-like score (i.e. no effect), and red represents scores greater than that of the wildtype protein. Yellow cells indicate the original amino acid in the wildtype sequence. Diagonal dashes on each cell indicate either standard deviation or standard error of the shown score (depending which is reported in the original score set) scaled to the difference between null and wildtype scores; i.e. a dash the size of the entire cell indicates stdev/stderr the size of 1 wt-null unit. Uncertainty greater than 1 wt-null unit is indicated by the cell being crossed out.

 * Above the central heatmap is a summary bar that shows the relative frequency of each color in each column. 
 
 * The orange tracks above the summary bar indicate burial in protein-protein interactions based on the PDB structures selected. These can be interpreted as amino acid residues being part of an interaction interface.

 * The steelblue track above that indicates the relative solvent-accessible surface area of each residue. High-solvent accessibility indicates amino acids being on the outside surface of a protein.

 * The next track indicates the secondary structure of the protein. Spiral patterns indicate α-helices or 310-helices, while arrows indicate β-strands.

 * Finally, the top track shows residue-specific evolutionary sequence conservation, according to the AMAS algorithm based on the UniRef90 sequence set.

## References

Matreyek, Kenneth A., et al. "Multiplex assessment of protein variant abundance by massively parallel sequencing." Nature genetics 50.6 (2018): 874-882.

Weile, Jochen, et al. "A framework for exhaustively mapping functional missense variants." Molecular systems biology 13.12 (2017): 957.

Information from https://www.mavedb.org/