# SCREEN: Search Candidate cis-Regulatory Elements by ENCODE

The ENCODE Encyclopedia comprises two levels of epigenomic and transcriptomic annotations. The ground level includes annotations such as peaks and quantifications for individual data types produced by the ENCODE uniform processing pipelines. The integrative level contains annotations generated by integrating multiple ground-level annotations. The core of the integrative level is the Registry of candidate cis-Regulatory Elements (cCREs) which are displayed in SCREEN, a web-based visualization engine designed specifically for the Registry. SCREEN allows the user to explore cCREs and investigate how these elements relate to other Encyclopedia annotations and raw ENCODE data.

## The Registry of cCREs

cCREs are the subset of representative DNase hypersensitivity sites (rDHSs) supported by either histone modifications (H3K4me3 and H3K27ac) or CTCF-binding data. We start with 93 million individual DHSs across 706 DNase-seq profiles in human and 20 million individual DHSs from 173 DNase-seq profiles in mouse. For each respective species, we iteratively cluster the DHSs across all profiles and select the DHS with the highest signal (read depth normalized signal) as the rDHS for each cluster. This iterative clustering and selection process continues until it results in a list of non-overlapping rDHSs—2.2 million rDHSs in human and 1.2 rDHSs in mouse—representing all DHSs (Figure 3). We then further selected rDHSs with high DNase signal in at least one biosample (defined as a Z-score > 1.64, see details on defining high signal below). Finally, from this subset of high signal rDHSs, we selected all elements that were also supported by high H3K4me3, H3K27ac, and/or CTCF ChIP-seq signals in concerted biosamples (i.e., samples with complementary assay coverage). This resulted in a total of 926,535 human cCREs.

## Classification of cCREs

Many uses of cCREs are based on the regulatory role associated with their biochemical signatures. Thus, we putatively defined cCREs in one of the following annotation groups based on each element’s dominant biochemical signals across all available biosamples. Analogous to GENCODE's catalog of genes, which are defined irrespective of their varying expression levels and alternative transcripts across different cell types, we provide a general, cell type-agnostic classification of cCREs based on the max-Zs as well as its proximity to the nearest annotated TSS:

* cCREs with promoter-like signatures (cCRE-PLS) fall within 200 bp (center to center) of an annotated GENCODE TSS and have high DNase and H3K4me3 signals (evaluated as DNase and H3K4me3 max-Z scores, defined as the maximal DNase or H3K4me3 Z scores across all biosamples with data; see Methods).

* cCREs with enhancer-like signatures (cCRE-ELS) have high DNase and H3K27ac max-Z scores and must additionally have a low H3K4me3 max-Z score if they are within 200 bp of an annotated TSS. The subset of cCREs-ELS within 2 kb of a TSS is denoted proximal (cCRE-pELS), while the remaining subset is denoted distal (cCRE-dELS).

* DNase-H3K4me3 cCREs have high H3K4me3 max-Z scores but low H3K27ac max-Z scores and do not fall within 200 bp of a TSS.

* CTCF-only cCREs have high DNase and CTCF max-Z scores and low H3K4me3 and H3K27ac max-Z scores.

In addition to the cell type-agnostic classification described above, we evaluated the biochemical activity of each cCRE in each individual cell type using the corresponding DNase, H3K4me3, H3K27ac, and CTCF data. All cCREs with low DNase Z-scores in a particular cell type are bundled into one “inactive” state for that cell type; the remaining “active” cCREs are divided into eight states according to their epigenetic signal Z-scores, producing nine possible states in total. The three groups described above—cCRE-PLS, cCRE-ELS, and CTCF-only cCRE—apply to the active cCREs within a particular cell type. Two additional groups are defined with respect to individual cell types: an inactive group, containing all cCREs in the inactive state, and a DNase-only group, containing cCREs with high DNase Z-scores but low H3K4me3, H3K27ac, and CTCF Z-scores within the cell type. Importantly, while the classification schemes in Figures 2 and 3 place each cCRE into only one activity group, the signal strengths for all recorded epigenetic features are retained for each cCRE in the Registry, and these can be used for customized searches by users.

We also attempt to make group assignments for cCREs in a particular biosample not fully covered by the four core assays, making some approximations. For samples with DNase data, we classify elements using the available marks. For example, if a sample lacks H3K27ac its cCREs will be assigned to the PLS and DNase-H3K4me3 groups but not the pELS or dELS groups. For biosamples lacking DNase data, we do not have the resolution to identify specific elements. Therefore, for these biosamples, we simply label the cCRE as having a high or low signal for every available assay. In these biosamples, cCREs with low H3K4me3, H3K27ac, or CTCF signals were labelled “unclassified” because we were unable to classify them as low-DNase without DNase data. In both SCREEN and in downloadable files biosamples lacking data are clearly labeled as such.

Information from https://screen.wenglab.org/
