# Human Phenotype Ontology

The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) project provides an ontology of medically relevant phenotypes, disease-phenotype annotations, and the algorithms that operate on these. The HPO can be used to support differential diagnostics, translational research, and a number of applications in computational biology by providing the means to compute over the clinical phenotype. The HPO is being used for computational [deep phenotyping](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22504886/) and precision medicine as well as integration of clinical data into translational research. Deep phenotyping can be defined as the precise and comprehensive analysis of phenotypic abnormalities in which the individual components of the phenotype are observed and described. The HPO is being increasingly adopted as a standard for phenotypic abnormalities by diverse groups such as international rare disease organizations, registries, clinical labs, biomedical resources, and clinical software tools and will thereby contribute toward nascent efforts at global data exchange for identifying disease etiologies [(Köhler et al, 2017)](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27899602/).

The HPO currently contains over 13,000 terms arranged in a directed acyclic graph and are connected by is-a (subclass-of) edges, such that a term represents a more specific or limited instance of its parent term(s). All relationships in the HPO are is-a relationships, i.e. simple class-subclass relationships. For instance, Abnormal lens morphology is-a Abnormal eye morphology. The relationships are transitive, meaning that they are inherited up all paths to the root. Phenotypic abnormality is the main subontology of the HPO and contains descriptions of clinical abnormalities. Additional subontologies are provided to describe inheritance patterns, onset/clinical course and modifiers of abnormalities.

## What is An Ontology and What Use is An Ontology for Medical Genetics Research?

The word ontology is derived from Greek words meaning the study of existence and being. More recently, the word ontology has been used in computer science to describe systems that describe concepts within some domain and relationships between those concepts. For instance, the [Gene Ontology consortium](http://geneontology.org/) has developed an extensive ontology describing molecular functions, biological processes, and cellular locations over the last decade and a number of groups have supplied annotations using the GO terms to gene products of many organisms. The study of human phenotypes in the context of hereditary and common disease has the potential to lead to great insight on the function of genes and genetic networks. The HPO provides computational resources that allow large-scale computational analysis of the human phenome.

## What is the Medical Focus of the Human Phenotype Ontology?

The medical focus of the HPO in its initial decade (2007-2017) was on rare, mainly Mendelian diseases. The construction of the initial version of the HPO in 2007/2008 was performed by generating an ontology based on descriptions in the Clinical Synopsis of the [Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database](https://omim.org/). Since the [initial publication of the HPO in 2008](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18950739/), the HPO team has held regular workshops with clinicians to refine and extend the clinical terminology of the HPO in specific areas such as cardiology or immunology. We have added textual definitions, computational logical definitions, and roughly 6,000 new terms since then.

The focus of the HPO will be extended to other areas of medicine in coming years. A pilot project on common-disease annotations was published in 2015

## Terms in the Human Phenotype Ontology

Each term in the HPO describes a clinical abnormality. These may be general terms, such as Abnormal ear morphology or very specific ones such as Chorioretinal atrophy. Each term is also assigned to one of the five subontologies (see Table below) The terms have a unique ID such as HP:0001140 and a label such as Epibulbar dermoid. Most terms have textual definitions such as An epibulbar dermoid is a benign tumor typically found at the junction of the cornea and sclera (limbal epibullar dermoid). The source of the definition must be indicated. Many terms have synonyms. For instance, Epibulbar dermoids is taken to be a synonym of Epibulbar dermoids.

Information from https://hpo.jax.org/app/help/introduction