# 'DGIdb: The Drug Interaction Database'
The goal of DGIdb is to help you annotate your genes of interest with respect to known drug-gene interactions and potential druggability.
## About
The druggable genome can be defined as the genes or gene products that are known or predicted to interact with drugs, ideally with a therapeutic benefit to the patient. Such genes are of particular interest to large-scale cancer profiling efforts such as TCGA, ICGC and others that identify lists of potential cancer driver genes from high-throughput sequence and other genome-wide data. In cancer therapy, the increasing number of targeted drugs--those designed to inactivate proteins carrying activating amino acid changes as determined by mutational analyses--make more compelling the need for a searchable database of drug-gene interactions. A similar paradigm exists in the research of other human diseases. Thus, a commonly asked question in such projects is whether potential driver genes are targeted by any known drugs or belong to any putatively druggable gene categories. Along these lines, recent high profile cancer marker papers have presented “druggable gene” analyses. These analyses attempt to prioritize genes for further study, functional experiments, and ultimately to help guide the design of clinical trials. Unfortunately, there remains a large knowledge gap between clinical domain experts and genomic researchers. The former are intimately familiar with the disease-specific pathways and targeted therapies being used in the field. However, the latter possess the technical expertise to detect the known and potentially novel driver events hidden in the molecular data of disease samples under study. There is a critical need for tools that bridge this gap to help both basic and clinical researchers to prioritize and interpret the results of genome-wide studies in the context of gene function, clinical phenotypes, treatment decisions and patient outcomes.

## Gene Categories
Gene categories in DGIdb refers to a set of genes belonging to a group that is deemed to be potentially druggable. For example, kinases are generally deemed to have high potential value for development of targeted drugs. For more details on the sources of druggable gene category definitions, refer to the sources and background reading.

## Interaction Type
An interaction type describes the nature of the association between a particular gene and drug. For example, TTD reports the drug-gene interaction, SUNITINIB-FLT3. The interaction type is reported as 'inhibitor'. Interaction type, as used in DGIdb, is very broad. Dozens of interaction types are currently defined. Many interaction types describe the mechanism of action between a small molecule and a protein. However, other broader types of 'interaction' might also be used. e.g. Gene X mediates 'resistance' or 'sensitivity' to drug Y. A full list of interaction types and their definition can be found on the [Interaction Types & Directionalities page](https://dgidb.org/interaction_types).
Interaction types can be loosely grouped into Activating interaction types and Inhibiting interaction types. Activating interactions are those where the drug increases the biological activity or expression of a gene target while Inhibiting interactions are those where the drug decreases the biological activity or expression of a gene target. To see which interaction types fall under which directionality check out the list of interaction types on the Interaction Types & Directionalities page.

## Interaction Score
Please see the [Interaction Score & Query Score](https://dgidb.org/score) page for a detailed explanation of these terms.

## How is DGIdb Different
There are many differences. DGIdb is limited to human genes only. DrugBank and TTD are databases that catalogue drugs and store detailed information about those drugs and the genes they target. DGIdb aggregates many such databases into a common framework. DGIdb adds considerable functionality for efficiently searching a list of input genes against these sources. DGIdb integrates both known drug-gene interactions and potentially druggable gene data. DGIdb allows the user to refine their query to certain gene families, types of interactions, etc. DGIdb is open source and available in a format that would allow you to create your own instance. DGIdb incorporates sources of drug-gene interaction data that were previously only available in inaccessible formats (e.g. tables in a PDF document). DGIdb is meant to be used in combination with the original sources of raw data. Wherever possible we link out to those original sources.

Information from https://dgidb.org/f



